---
title: Clustering Countries based on Covid-19 indicators
---

# Abstract

The COVID-19 outbreak was characterized as a pandemic by the WHO on March 11, 2020. As the new epidemic Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) spreads, there has been a lot of research for better understanding on the effects of the virus. We can help the global community and researchers to better understand the disease by sharing insights derived from datasets which are available in Kaggle. We used the publicly available COVID-19 related datasets from sources like Johns Hopkins, United Nations and many others. Since data clustering is one of the useful unsupervised learning that groups data into clusters, we decided to use clustering methods, K-means and GMM, to group similar countries together so that we get insight into finding the similar attributes and hidden patterns of COVID-19 clusters

# Introduction and Related Work

We are attempting to analyse how we could effectively group different countries based on various features like health conditions of people, nourishment levels, testing done, access to healthcare etc. by using 2 different clustering algorithms, K-Means and Expectation Maximization using Gaussian Mixture Models. We are also trying to find out which factors are affecting Covid-19 cases the most and analyse how the top 5 factors are affecting the Covid-19 cases in different countries.  Figure 1: Map of confirmed COVID-19 Cases in different countries The figure above shows countries grouped with respect to the number of COVID-19 cases. It can be analysed that most of the countries are in low range. It also shows the USA having the highest number of confirmed COVID-19 cases. However, clustering countries only on the basis of confirmed COVID-19 cases will be a naive approach. No conclusive and preventive measures can be concluded from such clustering. In order to address the problem of clustering countries such that it gives important information about their characteristics can help us to develop a strategy ahead of time that will help us prevent sudden outbreaks of such pandemics in the future. For instance, if our experiments find a country characteristically similar to the United States of America, we can learn from the pros and cons of the country and use it to make better policies and decisions in the other similarly grouped countries. This will help us to evade expected dangers and help policy makers design better policies and practices to keep the impact of this pandemic to the minimum.

# Algorithms

Clustering is a data analysis algorithm which is used to group related data based on different factors. There are different clustering algorithms like K-Means clustering, Mean-Shift clustering, Expectation Maximization using Gaussian Mixtures, Density – based spatial clustering etc.

We have used the K-Means algorithm and Expectation Maximization using Gaussian Mixture Models for our analysis.

## K-Means:

The K-Means algorithm is an iterative algorithm that tries to partition the dataset into a  K-number of clusters based on data points belonging to distinct non-overlapping sub-groups. It assigns data points to a cluster such the sum of the squared distance between the data points and the cluster’s centroid is minimum.The k-means algorithm works as follows:

Pick k centroids at random.
Assign each data point to the nearest centroid
Consider for each centroid, the data point assigned to it and recompute the centroid.
Repeat step 2& 3 until convergence. 
The k-means algorithm has a time complexity O(n) as we are just iteratively computing the distances between points and group centers, thereby rendering it to run quickly. However, K-means is considered naive as it uses the mean value for the cluster center and the data points are circularly distributed. Additionally, it classifies every data point to belong in one cluster only. We have used sklearn’s k-means library implementation in our experiment to cluster the various countries. We utilized the K-Means++ method to initialize the centroids since it tends to improve the clusters and converge more rapidly. This can be more computationally costly relative to random centroid initialization though. Random centroid initialization can be problematic though since we can get different clusters every time. With K-Means++ initialization, it specifies a procedure to initialize the clusters with before moving forward with the standard K-Means clustering algorithm. We have used sklearn’s K-Means implementation in our experiment to cluster the various countries on different factors.

 

## Expectation Maximization using GMM:

In GMMs we assume that the data points are Gaussian distributed and hence we have two parameters to describe the shape of the clusters, namely, the mean and standard deviation. As a result, they give us more flexibility than K-Means. To find the parameters for the Gaussian of each cluster, we use an optimization algorithm called Expectation-Maximization. The algorithm works as follows:

Select the number of clusters and randomly initialize Gaussian Distribution parameters for each cluster.
Compute the probability that each data point belongs to a particular cluster. 
Based on these probabilities, we compute a new set of parameters for each Gaussian distribution so that we maximize the probabilities of data points within the cluster.
Repeat step 2&3 until convergence.
As we are using standard deviation as one of the parameters, GMMs give more flexibility in terms of cluster covariance than K-Means allowing the clusters to take on any ellipse shape unlike K-Means which allow only circular shapes.  It also allows the data point to have a mixed membership by saying that a data point can belong X-percent to one class, Y-percent to another class etc. We have used sklearn’s gmm implementation in our experiment to cluster the various countries on different factors.


## Mutual information regression:

Regression allows us to estimate the relationship between a dependent variable and one or more independent variables whereas mutual information of two random variables is the measure of mutual dependence between the two variables. Mutual information when used with regression refers to the amount of information obtained about one variable through observing the other variable. We have used sklearn’s mutual_info_regression on different  features to understand their impact on the total number of Covid cases. The function relies on nonparametric methods based on entropy estimation from k-nearest neighbors distances. The result is then plotted on a bar chart so that we get the indicators for the Covid cases in decreasing order of impact.

# Conclusion

This experiment identified the top factors that indicated a higher ratio of confirmed COVID-19 cases: current health expenditure per capita, test ratio, HDI, informed risk, and mortality rate under 5. We showed the necessity of scaling the data to similar magnitudes in order to give the different factors an even weight in clustering. By looking at the elbow curve of the sum of squared differences between data points and their clusters, we were able to find 5 clusters to be the optimal number of clusters for our data. The mutual information regression of the ratio of confirmed cases against the other factors allowed us to identify current health expenditure per capita and the ratio of confirmed cases as the best factors to visualize our clusters on. We utilized K-Means clustering by scaling the top factors in order to visually group countries and analyze the similarities between them. We were able to recognize the patterns among the groups by finding the averages of these factors to compare the clusters. Furthermore, we used GMM clustering as an additional baseline and found related clustering results, conclusive enough that further exploration of dissimilar baselines and features can help in more explicit and generalised clusters of countries.
